# 1.3 Concerning the distinct properties of those worms in the beards and the consimilarity of them

## Concerning the distinct properties of those worms in the beards and the consimilarity of them to the three vices.

Also, it is amazing and deserving of meditation on beards that those three kinds of worms are distinguished with respect to individual properties. The first \[type of worm\] adheres to the flesh and does not pass to the hairs; the second adheres to the hairs and does not leave them; the third passes through both in turn. Those have happy and purified beards who are ignorant of this and do not experience it. The three vices are pleasure, dishonesty and dupliciousness. See how pleasure, in the manner of the lentipedum, adheres to the flesh and does not have a dwelling-place in the hairs, since it does not wish to appear outwardly at that which pertains to manly ornament and decorousness and virtue, but \[rather\] it wishes to lie low in the hidden places of shadows. Pleasure is in inactive, unwilling and idle things and every idle man is in desires and desires torment the lazy man, and this signification is \[represented\] in lentipedes occupying beards. Dishonesty disgraces the honorable exterior and \(as it were\) occupies the hairs of beards, when against the reverence of maturity, it gathers together the manifold inconstancies of its vice and superfluity, which is the most foul gathering of lendiums to be gathered on beards. That this miserable vice-riddledness does not leave the hairs and does not pass to the flesh seems to insinuate this signification: that those who reflect on vanities and false senselessness, are stuck outwardly in their empty superfluities and adhere to human favours with the immobilite of stubbornness, so that they seem to neglect wholly the care of the flesh. For they wish to be seen such that they are thought to philosophize and they simulate the veneration of wisdom \(as it were in beards\) when those miserable, vile and dishonest ones are known to nourish nothing but a multitude of lendium in their beards. Duplicity holds the place of the third vice in beards, which advertises its name from its feet on the eye, on account that a duplicious man is inconstant in spirit in all his paths, in which manner also this kind of tiny worm runs scurries from the hair to the flesh and from the flesh to the hairs. Therefore, just as the first and second kind of worm are immobile, the third is mobile and appear plainly in the beards and hairs, thus it is able to be recognized manifestly in those vices if it is inquired after with zeal and diligence. But what is that third kind of worm that takes its name from the foot on the eye, so that both itself is able to be understood from the vice of duplicity and every beard is able to be cleaned deservedly? Since the foot is the limb with which is proper to tread the earth and the eye signifies the sense and the affect of the heart, to be a foot on the eye \(that is, next to the eye\) is what else than never to raise the intention or the sense and affect of the heart from terrestrial things. But if the foot is earthbound, the eyes ought to be heavenbound and he who is of this kind, will say, “my eyes always look to the lord.” The foot and the eye greatly differ from each other and the foot shall not be in the eye nor duplicity in the soul. And so, brothers, let not the unction of a pure heart and good conscience and a truth faith lack to yourselves for inacting a cleanliness of beards, for in a pure heart, pleasure does not have a place and dishonesty does not approach towards good conscience, nor duplicity towards truth faith. He who does not see these things, does not have a clean beard, since the unction does not descend on his heard as \[did\] the unguent which descended on the beard, the beard of Aaron.

