# Prologue

An _apologia_ of Burchard, the abbot of Bellevalle, to the brothers of _Roserius_ for the purpose of saving beards and of sending greetings.

            Perhaps I am called beardly- eloquent \(barbilogus\) since often I make a beardly-sounding \(barbisonatem\) speech about beards. However, this discourse \[is\] an apologetic concerning your beards, since I am accused by you that I have proclaimed an anathema of burning upon your beards.

            Far be it from me that so barbarous a thought \(to wish your beards to be burned\) should come into my mind. Indeed, he who evily interpreted an anathema of beards on your beards does not speak truly on his beard: just as the beards of our or any other brothers were not prevented by an anathema of burning, if wisely and prudently that shall have done what is said there, thus your beards are not included under the injunction of the burning if you did not undertake that evil which merits that it pass through fire and become food for fire. Therefore, whatsoever is said in a letter concerning the burning of beards, neither should you change your beards if you are innocent nor should ours or others be able to exclude their beards if they fall into guilt, of which punishment is merited. On that account, your beards do not harm me, the beards which I hope should remain whole and far removed from burnings. Your beards, however, do harm me if, on account of them, you might consider me hated and you might experience alienation from the grace of love which you were accustomed to hold dear before that business concerning the beards arose. If I speak evily concerning beards and if what I am accusedto have said about beards is not fitting to be said, let my beard cease to grow or furthermore it behoves that it not be shaved and I should become beardless just like a woman. For what did I say about beards. “Beards,” I said, “of those ought to be made unto fire and into food for fire who knowingly and prudently enter the storm which makes the soul be shipwrecked!” Who hears this \[statement\] to offer reproach except a foolish and unbearded individual who lacks \[even\] a youthful beard. Who does not exclaim, “Let it be made, Let it be made” since it is more just that beards are burnt than souls are risked.

